add deployment chapter to typescript-apollo tutorial (#1416)
howtographql/howtographql: content/backend/typescript-apollo/9-deployment.md

### Prerequisites 

You will need to install a few command line tools and create some accounts to follow along with this chapter. We suggest you do this now so as not to break the flow of the tutorial.

- **GitHub (Account)**: Create a free account on [GitHub](https://github.com/join).
- **GitHub (CLI)**: Install the latest stable version of the [GitHub CLI](https://cli.github.com/). Afterward, [login to your GitHub account](https://cli.github.com/manual/gh_auth_login) on the CLI. 
- **Heroku (Account)**: Create a free account on [Heroku](https://signup.heroku.com/). 
- **Heroku (CLI)**: Install the latest stable version of the [Heroku CLI](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-cli). Afterward, [login to your Heroku account](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-cli#get-started-with-the-heroku-cli) on the Heroku CLI. 
- **[Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)** and **[Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/)**

> > **Note:** Docker and Docker Compose will be used to run an instance of the PostgreSQL database. If you prefer, you can install and run [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/) natively as well. If you choose to run natively, you will need to make some slight changes to the instructions shown in this tutorial. 

Author: > Could you mention what these changes are? Will these changes also be highlighted in the tutorial?

The changes won't be highlighted. But it's basically just changing the Prisma connection string and not starting the docker container. 

These steps aren't explicitly mentioned though as it would add unnecessary complexity for anyone using the containerized database.

> > **Note:** Docker and Docker Compose will be used to run an instance of the PostgreSQL database. If you prefer, you can install and run [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/) natively as well. If you choose to run natively, you will need to make some slight changes to the instructions shown in this tutorial. 

Author: > If you choose to run PostgreSQL locally 

Is locally the right word here? Because the containerized version is also running "locally".

> > **Note:** Docker and Docker Compose will be used to run an instance of the PostgreSQL database. If you prefer, you can install and run [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/) natively as well. If you choose to run natively, you will need to make some slight changes to the instructions shown in this tutorial. 

Reviewer: I'm not entirely sure. I will leave it up to you to choose the right terminology here.

With that out of the way, let's get started!

### Adding version control

In order to automate the deployment process, you will need to use version control to synchronize changes with the production deployment. This tutorial will not cover the basics of using version control. 

> **Note 1:** If you need to learn the basics of using git, I would suggest [this series](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/setting-up-a-repository). To understand the git commands used in this tutorial, the first two articles of this series are sufficient.  

> > **Note 2:** If you are already using version control and have a repository set up on GitHub for this project, you can skip this section.  

Author: > After going through this section of the tutorial, it seems folks who are familiar with git and GitHub need it anyway 

I think my intended meaning was a bit unclear here. I meant that if the user has already set up version control and a remote repository, they can skip the section. I didn't mean that they can skip the section if they know about version control. 

I've further clarified the sentence.

Before you can commit anything, you need to add some files to your `.gitignore`. 

<Instruction>

Update your `.gitignore` with the following files and folders:

```(path=".../hackernews-typescript/.gitignore")
node_modules
.env
.vscode
dist
```

</Instruction>

Now it's time to create your first commit 🎉 

<Instruction>

Add your project source files to git and create your first commit:

```bash(path=".../hackernews-typescript/")
git add .
git commit -m "first commit"
```

</Instruction>

Now that you have a local commit, it's time to create a remote repository on GitHub. You can do this entirely from your terminal using the GitHub command line tool (also known as `gh`). 

> **Note 1:** If you haven't installed `gh` and logged in with your GitHub credentials, you must do it now.

> **Note 2:** If you're not comfortable using the CLI to create a repository, you can do it the conventional way using the GitHub website graphical user interface (GUI). However, this will not be shown in this tutorial. 

<Instruction>

Create a new repository for your project:

```bash(path=".../hackernews-typescript/")
gh repo create hackernews-typescript --source . --private 
```
</Instruction>

> This command will create a new private repository inside your GitHub account with the name `hackernews-typescript`. The final results of the above command should look like the following, with "YourGitHubHandle" being replaced by your _actual_ GitHub handle: 

Author: You're right, it's a bit redundant :laughing:

```shell(nocopy)
✓ Created repository <username>/hackernews-typescript on GitHub

> ✓ Added remote git@github.com:<username>/hackernews-typescript.git

Author: I think it's being mistaken for an HTML tag. I'll just change the syntax to avoid the issue.

```

<Instruction>

> Push your local commit to the newly created remote repository on GitHub. 

Author: ```suggestion
Push your local commit to the new remote repository on GitHub. 
```

```
git push origin master
```

</Instruction>

Once this command finishes execution, you should be able to see the repository with all your code under your GitHub profile. 

> **Note:** This tutorial assumes the name of your default branch is "master". In case it is "main", replace "master" with "main" in the above command. 

### Changing SQLite to PostgreSQL 

You have been using SQLite as the database for your API throughout this tutorial. However, SQLite is not _typically_ used for production web backends for a number of reasons. So before you start working on deployment, you will migrate from SQLite to a more conventional and powerful backend database: PostgreSQL.

> > **Note:** In the real world, it is quite rare for an application to undergo a database migration. We chose SQLite for this tutorial as it is very simple and easy to use. However, deploying SQLite to Heroku would be difficult and need a lot of extra configuration (more info [here](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/sqlite3)). This is why you will migrate to PostgreSQL for this chapter. 

Author: Could you clarify which opinion you're referring to: SQLite or PostgreSQL?

<Instruction>

Start by removing the SQLite file and migrations from the `prisma` folder:

```bash(path=".../hackernews-typescript/")
rm -rf prisma/migrations
rm prisma/dev.db
```
</Instruction>

Now that all SQLite assets have been removed, it's time to change our configure our Prisma schema to use PostgreSQL.

<Instruction>

Change the `datasource` API block in your `schema.prisma` file as follows: 

```graphql{2-3}(path=".../hackernews-node/prisma/schema.prisma")
datasource db {
  provider = "postgresql"  
  url      = env("DATABASE_URL")  
}
```

</Instruction>

> Let's understand what is happening: 

Author: I think sentences placed before explaining a code snippet are the only place the "use second person" rule is violated. A lot of the previous guides on the website were following the same convention, so I didn't think too much of it.

I'll fix the violations when I find them but a full review might be needed down the line to fix them all.

1. The `provider` field signifies the underlying database type. You changed the field from `sqlite` to `postgresql`.  

2. The `url` field specifies the connection string to the database. For SQLite, this is simply the file path. In the case of PostgreSQL, the database connection path will be read from the `DATABASE_URL` [environment variable](https://www.prisma.io/docs/guides/development-environment/environment-variables) of the machine's local environment. 

Now, you need to run an instance of PostgreSQL on your local machine. You are going to do this using a containerized version of PostgreSQL. 

<Instruction>

Create a `docker-compose.yml` file to store your PostgreSQL container configuration:

```bash(path=".../hackernews-typescript/")
touch docker-compose.yml
```
</Instruction>

<Instruction>

```yaml{}(path=".../hackernews-typescript/docker-compose.yml")
version: '3.8'
services:

  # Docker connection string for local machine: postgres://prisma:prisma@localhost:5432/

  postgres:

>     image: postgres:10.3    # 1

Author: No particular reason actually. Do you think I should use `latest` or another specific version instead?

    restart: always
    environment:            # 2
      - POSTGRES_USER=prisma
      - POSTGRES_PASSWORD=prisma
    volumes:                # 3
      - postgres:/var/lib/postgresql/data
    ports:
      - '5432:5432'         # 4

volumes:
  postgres:
```
</Instruction>

> Let's go through some of the import parts of this compose file:

Author: > I'm not sure if it's encouraged to use the first person in HowToGraphQL. 

HowToGraphQL also suggests [using the second person](https://github.com/howtographql/howtographql/blob/main/meta/writing-guidelines.md#use-youyouryoull--command-the-reader). However the mandate has been somewhat loosely enforced.

I should be doing a better job enforcing this, especially in my own writing, so apologies for that.

2. The `environment` array specifies which environment variables get passed to the container during initialization. This is typically used to pass configuration options and secrets (such as username and password) to the container.
3. The `volumes` array is used for persisting data in the host file system. 
4. The `ports` array is used to map ports from the host machine to the container. The format follows the convention of "host_port:container_port". In this case, you are mapping the port `5432` of the host machine to port `5432` of the `postgres` container. 5432 is conventionally the port used by PostgreSQL. 

With that out of the way, we can spin up the database with one simple command. Before you move on to the next instruction, make sure that nothing is already running on port 5432, in which case, the following command will fail. 

<Instruction>

Open a *new* terminal window and run the following command:

```bash(path=".../hackernews-typescript/")
docker-compose up
```

</Instruction>

If everything worked properly, the new terminal window should show logs saying that the "postgres" container has started up successfully. 

> > **Note:** You cannot close the new terminal window as it will also stop the container. You can avoid this if you add `-d` to the previous command, like this: `docker-compose up -d`

Author: > I would suggest using `docker-compose up -d` instead of `docker-compose up` in the Instruction block.

I considered this but opted to not use the `-d` flag because it shows all the logs of what is happening under the hood inside the container. This has educational value to new users and might be helpful in debugging errors in case something goes wrong. 

For expert users, the choice to use the `-d` flag is always there and is made explicit in the note right after the instruction block. 

I'm willing to change this though and I'd love to hear your thoughts on this!

<Instruction>

Add all your changes and create a new commit: 

```bash(path=".../hackernews-typescript/")
git add .
git commit -m "migrate database to postgres"
```

</Instruction>

### Update `index.ts` to make it suitable for deployment

You will need to make a few changes to the `index.ts` to make the API ready for deployment. 

<Instruction>

Update `src/index.ts` as follows:

```typescript{2,10-11,14}(path=".../hackernews-typescript/src/index.ts")
import { ApolloServer } from "apollo-server";
import { ApolloServerPluginLandingPageLocalDefault } from "apollo-server-core";

import { schema } from "./schema";
import { context } from "./context";

export const server = new ApolloServer({
    schema,
    context,
    introspection: true,                                      // 1
    plugins: [ApolloServerPluginLandingPageLocalDefault()],   // 2
});

const port = process.env.PORT || 3000;                        // 3

server.listen({ port }).then(({ url }) => {
    console.log(`🚀  Server  ready at ${url}`);
});

```

</Instruction>

> Let's explain the changes: 

Author: Hmm, this is also happening for me on Firefox but not on Chrome. 

This seems to be a bug, let me look into this a bit further.

> 1. "[Introspection](https://graphql.org/learn/introspection/)" is a feature that allows a GraphQL client to ask a GraphQL server for information about what queries it supports. Apollo turns off introspection in production by default as a security measure ([more info](https://www.apollographql.com/blog/graphql/security/why-you-should-disable-graphql-introspection-in-production/#:~:text=Turning%20off%20introspection%20in%20production,%2C%20resolvers%2C%20introspection%3A%20process.)). However, we decided to keep introspection on for convenience, though this is not something you would normally do in a production application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. "[Introspection](https://graphql.org/learn/introspection/)" is a feature that allows a GraphQL client to ask a GraphQL server for information about what queries it supports. Apollo turns off introspection in production by default as a security measure. However, we decided to keep introspection on for convenience, though this is not something you normally do in a production application.

>  Read further on [Why You Should Disable GraphQL Introspection In Production – GraphQL Security](https://www.apollographql.com/blog/graphql/security/why-you-should-disable-graphql-introspection-in-production/).
```
You can rephrase the wording here.

>However, we decided to keep introspection on for convenience, though this is not something you would normally do in a production application.

What convenience?

Author: Good point! Clarified.

2. Similar to introspection, Apollo also turns off Apollo Sandbox in the production version of an app. Once again, as this is not a real application with production workloads, we explicitly decided to keep it on for convenience.

> 3. Previously, Apollo Server was running on port 3000 on your local machine. In production, Heroku will provide the port number the app will run on through the `port` environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Previously, Apollo Server was running on port `3000` on your local machine. Heroku will provide the port number the app will run on through the `port` environment variable in production.
```

> > **Note:** Apollo Server determines whether your app is running in development or production by using the `NODE_ENV` environment variable, which is typically set to "production" during deployment (this is done automatically by Heroku). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Apollo Server determines whether your app is running in development or production by using the `NODE_ENV` environment variable, which is set automatically to "production" during deployment by Heroku.
```

### Create new scripts in `package.json` 

> So far, you have been using `ts-node` to run your TypeScript code. However, this has a memory and performance overhead. In production, you will transpile your code to JavaScript using the TypeScript compiler and run the JavaScript code directly using `node`. To do this, you will need to create two additional scripts in your `package.json`. You will also need to add a new script to apply migrations to your production database. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far, you have been using `ts-node` to run your TypeScript code. However, this has a memory and performance overhead. In production, you will transpile your code to JavaScript using the TypeScript compiler and run the JavaScript code directly using `node`. To do this, you will need to create two additional scripts in your `package.json`. You will also add a new script to apply database migrations to your production database. 
```

<Instruction> 

Update your `package.json` with the following scripts:

```json{5-7}(path=".../hackernews-typescript/package.json") 
  "scripts": {
    "dev": "ts-node-dev --transpile-only --no-notify --exit-child src/index.ts",
    "generate": "ts-node --transpile-only src/schema",
    "prettier-format": "prettier 'src/**/*.ts' --write",
    "migrate:deploy": "prisma migrate deploy",
    "build": "prisma generate && npm run generate && tsc",
    "start": "node dist/src/index.js"
  },
```

</Instruction>

Here's what the scripts are doing:

> 1. The `migrate:deploy` script is used to apply all pending migrations to the production database by running `prisma migrate deploy`. This command is somewhat different from `prisma migrate dev`, which you have been using to generate/apply migrations in your development database. You can find more information about the `migrate deploy` command in the [Prisma docs](https://www.prisma.io/docs/concepts/components/prisma-migrate#production-and-testing-environments).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The `migrate:deploy` script applies all pending migrations to the production database by running `prisma migrate deploy`. This command is somewhat different from `prisma migrate dev`, which you have used to generate/apply migrations in your development database. You can find more information about the `migrate deploy` command in the [Prisma docs](https://www.prisma.io/docs/concepts/components/prisma-migrate#production-and-testing-environments).
```

> 2. The `build` script is used to build the app from scratch. This involves three steps: first running `prisma generate` to create the Prisma Client, then running `src/schema.ts` to generate the nexus assets, and finally running the TypeScript compiler (or `tsc`) to transpile your TypeScript code to JavaScript. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The `build` script first runs `prisma generate` to create the Prisma Client, then runs `src/schema.ts` to generate the nexus assets, and finally transpiles your TypeScript code to JavaScript using the TypeScript compiler (or `tsc`). 
```

3. The `start` command runs the JavaScript code transpiled by `tsc` using `node`. Notice that the code generated by `tsc` goes into the `dist` folder because of the `outDir` option specified in your `tsconfig.json`. 

Now you will create another commit. 

<Instruction>

Add your project source files to git and create a new commit:

```bash(path=".../hackernews-typescript/")
git add .
git commit -m "update index.ts and create new scripts in package.json"
```

</Instruction>

With that out of the way, it's time to get started deploying the app! 🚀

### Creating resources on Heroku 

In this section, you will create the Heroku app along with a PostgreSQL database to host your API. Make sure you have created a Heroku account and logged into the CLI with the `heroku login` command before proceeding with this section. 

<Instruction>

> Inside the root folder of your project, start a new Heroku app with the following command. _Before running the command, make sure to replace "app-name-placeholder" with a meaningful name for your app._

Author: I think "app-name-placeholder" makes it very explicit that this is a placeholder name that needs to be replaced. In addition, the GitHub repo and directory are already named "hackernews-typescript". So I wanted the app name to be totally different from the repository name, to avoid any confusion. 

I think this is fine as it is.

To configure GitHub Actions, you define _workflows_ using the "yaml" file format. These workflows are stored in the `.github/workflows` directory of your project. You can configure workflows to run on different repository events, e.g., when a commit is pushed to the repository or when a pull request is created.

Each workflow can contain one or more _jobs_ which are dedicated tasks, which run in an isolated environment (known as a "runner"). A single job can also have one or more steps. In this project, you will create a single workflow with a job called `deploy`. 

<Instruction>

Create a `.github/workflows` directory and a new workflow inside it. 

```bash(path=".../hackernews-typescript/")
mkdir .github
mkdir .github/workflows
touch .github/workflows/deployment.yml
```

</Instruction>

<Instruction>

Define the `deploy` job inside the newly created workflow:

```yaml{}(path=".../hackernews-typescript/.github/workflows/continuous-integration.yml")
name: deploy-hackernews-app-heroku                       # 1

on:
  push:
    branches:                                            # 2
      - master

>       - main

Author: Perhaps it's better to explicitly keep both master and main? Most of the tutorials on the website still use the master branch, so it might be frustrating to new users if their code does not work as expected if they just directly copy-paste this code snippet.

jobs:  
  deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v2                        # 3
      - run: npm ci                                      # 4
      - name: Run production migration                   
        run: npm run migrate:deploy                      # 5     
        env:
          DATABASE_URL: ${{ secrets.DATABASE_URL }}
      - uses: akhileshns/heroku-deploy@v3.12.12          # 6
        with:
          heroku_api_key: ${{ secrets.HEROKU_API_KEY }}
          heroku_app_name: ${{ secrets.HEROKU_APP_NAME }}
          heroku_email: ${{ secrets.HEROKU_EMAIL }}
```

</Instruction>

Let's understand what is going on here:

> 1. The `name` keyword defines the name of the workflow. 

Author: I was on the fence about this too. However, [Github docs](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions) uses the "keyword" terminology so I opted to use that.

> 1. The `name` keyword defines the name of the workflow. 

Reviewer: Ah, okay. Let's stick with "keyword".

```bash(path=".../hackernews-typescript/")
heroku config:get DATABASE_URL
```

<Instruction>

Set the `DATABASE_URL` secret using the URL retreived from your Heroku app. 

```bash(path=".../hackernews-typescript/")
gh secret set DATABASE_URL
```

</Instruction>

That's it! All the secrets have been set and it is now possible to deploy and execute your github action. If you want to see the name of the secrets available in your repository, you can do so using the `gh secret list` command. 

<Instruction>

Create a new commit and push all your changes to the remote repository on GitHub: 

```bash(path=".../hackernews-typescript/")
git add .
git commit -m "create deployment github action workflow" 
git push origin master
```

</Instruction>

This should create and trigger the `deploy-hackernews-app-heroku` workflow on GitHub. You can trigger the workflow at any time creating an empty commit: 

```bash(path=".../hackernews-typescript/")
git commit --allow-empty -m "trigger build"
git push
```

Once you have pushed a commit, quickly go to the **Actions** tab of your GitHub repository, and you should see that the workflow is _in progress_. 

> ![Workflow in progress in the Actions tab](https://i.imgur.com/8xBtd3q.png)

Author: I think what you suggested is ideal. However, all the existing tutorials are using Imgur, so it would be somewhat time-consuming to refactor. My feeling is that we don't have the time to do this at the moment, but I'll bring this up with Niko.

> ![Workflow in progress in the Actions tab](https://i.imgur.com/8xBtd3q.png)

Reviewer: We wouldn't have to move **all** the assets but the assets for this tutorial. Most of the assets are hosted in the repository for the Prisma Blog. A possible option would be to host the images on GH – uploading them in an issue, discussion or PR and using the link they give you in the response 😅

> **Note:** The URL for your Heroku App is also provided as **Web URL** by the following CLI command: `heroku apps:info` 

<Instruction>

Run the following queries one after another to test out the `signup`, `post` mutation and the `feed` query. Make sure to set the `Authorization` header after the first query. 

```graphql

mutation SignUpMutation {
  signup(name: "Alice", email: "alice@prisma.io", password: "graphql") {
    token
    user {
      id
    }
  }
}

mutation FirstPostMutation {
  post(url: "nexusjs.org", description: "Code-First GraphQL schemas for JavaScript/TypeScript") {
    id
    description
    url
    postedBy {
      id
      name
      email
    }
  }
}

mutation SecondPostMutation {
  post(url: "www.prisma.io", description: "Next-generation Node.js and TypeScript ORM") {
    id
    description
    url
    postedBy {
      id
      name
      email
    }
  }
}

query FeedQuery{
  feed {
    count
    links {
      id
      createdAt
      description
    }
  }
}

```

</Instruction>

![Running API operations in production server](https://i.imgur.com/hNQsB3l.gif) 

### Exploring your data in Prisma Data Platform 

> Previously, you were using Prisma Studio to directly interact with your data. However, Prisma Studio is meant to be used with your development or test database and is not a great option to interact with production data. To solve this problem, Prisma has a hosted version of Prisma Studio inside the [Prisma Data Platform](https://cloud.prisma.io/), called the **Data Browser**.  

Author: ```suggestion
Previously, you were using Prisma Studio to directly interact with your data. However, Prisma Studio is meant to be used with your development or test database and is not a great option to interact with production data. To solve this problem, Prisma has a hosted version of Prisma Studio inside the [Prisma Data Platform](https://cloud.prisma.io/?utm_source=howtographql&utm_campaign=typescript-apollo), called the _Data Browser_.  
```

In case you are a part of multiple organizations, you will first be asked to choose which account you want to use. Then you will have to choose if you want to install Prisma on *all repositories* or *select repositories*. Choose **Only select repositories** and choose the **hackernews-typescript** repository. Then click on **Install**. 

Now you will be redirected back to the **Configure project** page. Choose **Import a Prisma repository** and then select the **hackernews-typescript** repository. Then give a suitable name to your project (this is the name of the Prisma Data Platform project, not to be confused with the name of the repository). Now click **Next** to continue. 

Now you will be shown the **Configure environment** page. Since you already have a database created, choose **Use my own database**. Then paste the connection string you received from Heroku. You can leave the other options to their default value. Finally, click on **Create project** to proceed. You will be given a connection URL to the [Prisma Data Proxy](https://www.prisma.io/docs/concepts/data-platform/data-proxy), which you can **skip** as you won't be using the Data Proxy at the moment. 

> Alright! With all the configuration out of the way, click on the **Data Browser** on the left-hand side to get a hosted version of the Prisma Studio. The next time you log in to the Prisma Data Platform, this project should be available for you to access. It will also be synced with any schema changes pushed to the `master` branch on GitHub. 

Author: Alright! With all the configuration out of the way, click on the **Data Browser** buton on the left-hand side to get a hosted version of the Prisma Studio. The next time you log in to the Prisma Data Platform, this project should be available for you to access. It will also be synced with any schema changes pushed to the `master` branch on GitHub.
```suggestion
Alright! With all the configuration out of the way, click on the **Data Browser** buton on the left-hand side to get a hosted version of the Prisma Studio. The next time you log in to the Prisma Data Platform, this project should be available for you to access. It will also be synced with any schema changes pushed to the `master` branch on GitHub.
```
